So now that we have a feeling for how we can insert content into the DOM,
let me come back to that live node list
versus non-live node list thing.
So we have this list here,
we worked with it many times,
I reloaded this document so
let me again select this like this as we did it many times in this module already
and now here, I used query selector,
this gives me access to this unordered list. Now I also want to get access to the list items in there and
for that, we can use document query selector all
li and this will select all list item elements on this entire page.
So of course not just in this list but on the entire page,
if we would want to restrict it to this list only, I would have to run this on the list instead of the
entire document which of course also works for this example here.
So now I got my list items here
and if I output them, you see it's a node list with a couple of list item objects in there
unsurprisingly.
Now I will also fetch my list items in another way, list items 2 here by reaching out to list
and then here I can use get elements by tag name for example and pass in this li tag name here.
That's one of the older query methods which is built in
and if I do this, list items 2 is a HTML collection actually
as you can see. So it's still an array-like object
as I mentioned, supports a couple of the important array methods but as you will learn later in the course
in the array module, not everything you can do on arrays but most of the things and it looks quite similar.
Well let's now add a new element, so I'll add a new li here with
document create element, like this and create a list item element and so that we can see it really good,
I'll also add a text content of item 4 again.
Now it's up to you how you want to insert this, you learned about different ways of doing that,
here I'll just reach out to the list and use append and append my new li,
you could use append child or target a specific place with after and before or insert adjacent element
and so on. Here I'll just insert it like this and once we did this, we of course see it here on the screen,
now to the interesting part. We got our two list items constants, list items and list items 2 and on
list items, you can already see
this still is a node list with three items.
So our most recent addition is not reflected here,
that's what I mean with non-live array or non-live list.
This is taking a snapshot of the DOM, of what we select there
when I run query selector all and does not update that array when that part which we queried in the
past changes.
Now, that's not necessarily a disadvantage from a performance perspective, from a memory consumption perspective,
this might even be better
and I also want to highlight that of course the individual objects in there are still reference values,
so an object in there is still of course a live reference to the DOM objects that are responsible for
what we see on the page.
So if I go to let's say the first item there and I change the text content to item 11 here for example,
that gets reflected on the screen because the items are reference values, these are pointers at the objects,
at the DOM objects in memory,
just the overall array is just a snapshot of list items when I ran that query selector
all command.
Now if we have a look at list items 2 however which is this HTML collection I got with get elements
by tag name, we can see this indeed is a live list which also includes our most recent addition.
So all these get elements by something, not get element by ID because that only gets a single element
which always is a live connection so to say but get elements by something,
this always gives you array-like objects with live lists which will change when the items you queried
in the past change,
so when the number of these items changes I should say. That can or cannot be an advantage,
often it will not matter to be honest. It could lead to a higher memory consumption if you're managing
a lot of such collections which change all the time
but again, that will also probably only matter in rare niche cases but for the most part, query selector
all simply should be used because it is more flexible, supports richer queries and therefore often
is a common choice if you want to query for multiple items.
I just wanted to highlight this difference again which sometimes can be an advantage, sometimes can be
a disadvantage, well and often to be honest, it will probably not matter that much.